**Disclaimer:** This document reflects the API for testing framework `API_VER
2110`, which is incompatible with prior versions.

# Table of Contents

- [Running the Machine](API2110.md#running-the-machine)
- [Getting/Setting Machine State](API2110.md#gettingsetting-machine-state)
- [Callbacks](API2110.md#callbacks)
- [Miscellaneous](API2110.md#miscellaneous)
- [Test Cases](API2110.md#test-cases)
- [Memory Interface with Labels](API2110.md#memory-interface-with-labels)
- [String Reading in Memory](API2110.md#string-reading-in-memory)
- [Automated Input](API2110.md#automated-input)
- [String Manipulation and Comparison](API2110.md#string-manipulation-and-comparison)

# Testing Framework API

The purpose of this document is to describe the subset of the LC3Tools API that
is relevant to unit testing. The full API can be found in
`src/backend/interface.h`. It is highly recommended to read the [testing
framework document](TEST2110.md) before reading this document.

There are two main types to use to the API: [`lc3::sim`](API2110.md#lc3sim),
and [`Tester`](API2110.md#tester).

# `lc3::sim`

This is the main interface to the simulator and is how common operations, such
as reading and writing memory, are done. The active `lc3::sim` object is
provided as an argument into each test case.

## Running the Machine

### `bool run(void)`

Run the machine from the location of the PC until completion. Completion is
indicated by setting the clock enable bit in the Machine Control Register (MCR),
typically as the last instruction of the HALT trap routine.

Return Value:

- `true` if program halted without any exceptions, `false` otherwise.

### `bool runUntilHalt(void)`

Run the machine from the location of the PC until a HALT (TRAP x25) instruction
is encountered. The HALT trap routine will not run. This is useful when
verifying register contents, as the HALT trap routine may clobber values.

Return Value:

- `true` if program halted without any exceptions, `false` otherwise.

### `bool runUntilInputRequested(void)`

Run the machine from the location of the PC until any keyboard input is
requested. This is useful when verifying I/O. See the [I/O
Paradigm (Polling)](TEST2110.md#io-paradigm-polling) for more details on usage.

Return Value:

- `true` if program halted without any exceptions, `false` otherwise.

### `void setRunInstLimit(uint64_t inst_limit)`

Sets the instruction count limit. Regardless of the type of run, simulation will
halt as soon as the instruction limit is reached. This can ensure that the unit
test does not run indefinitely even if the program it's running does not halt.
The instruction limit pertains to the each successive `run*` function executed.

Arguments:

- `inst_limit`: The number of instructions to execute before halting simulation.

### `void setBreakpoint(uint16_t addr)`

Set a breakpoint, by address, that will pause execution whenever the PC reaches
it.

Arguments:

- `addr`: Address to place breakpoint on.

### `bool removeBreakpoint(uint16_t addr)`

Remove a breakpoint by address.

Arguments:

- `addr`: Address to remove breakpoint from.

## Getting/Setting Machine State

### `uint16_t readReg(uint16_t id) const`

Get the value of a register.

Arguments:

- `id`: ID of register to read from.

Return Value:

- Value in the register.

### `void writeReg(uint16_t id, uint16_t value)`

Set a register to a value.

Arguments:

- `id`: ID of register to write to.
- `value`: New register value.

### `uint16_t readMem(uint16_t addr) const`

Get the value of a memory location.

Arguments:

- `addr`: Memory address to read from.

Return Value:

- Value in the memory location.

### `void writeMem(uint16_t id, uint16_t value)`

Set a memory location to a value.

Arguments:

- `id`: Memory address to write to.
- `value`: New memory location value.

### `uint16_t readPC(void) const`

Get the value of the Program Counter (PC).

Return Value:

- Value of the PC.

### `void writePC(uint16_t value)`

Set the value of the Program Counter (PC).

Arguments:

- `value`: New PC value.

### `uint16_t readPSR(void) const`

Get the value of the Processor Status Register (PSR).

Return Value:

- Value of the PSR.

### `void writePSR(uint16_t value)`

Set the value of the Processor Status Register (PSR).

Arguments:

- `value`: New PSR value.

### `uint16_t readMCR(void) const`

Get the value of the Memory Control Register (MCR).

Return Value:

- Value of the MCR.

### `void writeMCR(uint16_t value)`

Set the value of the Memory Control Register (MCR).

Arguments:

- `value`: New MCR value.

### `char readCC(void) const`

Get the value of the Condition Codes (CC) as a character.

Return Value:

- Value of the CC as 'N', 'Z', or 'P'.

### `void writeCC(uint16_t value)`

Set the value of the Condition Codes (CC) as a character.

Arguments:

- `value`: New MCR value as 'N', 'Z', or 'P'.

### `void writeStringMem(uint16_t addr, std::string const & value)`

Set a series of memory locations to a null-terminated string.

Arguments:

- `addr`: Starting address of string.
- `value`: New value of memory locations.

## Callbacks

There are several hooks available that may be useful during testing
such as when counting the number of times a specific subroutine is called. All
callback functions must match the signature defined by `callback_func_t`, and
the available callbacks are defined by the `lc3::core::CallbackType` enum.

### `callback_func_t`

The callback function prototype that all callback functions must follow, defined
as `std::function<void(lc3::core::CallbackType type, lc3::sim & sim)>`.

Arguments:

- `type`: Hook trigger given by the `lc3::core::CallbackType` enum.
- `sim`: Reference to simulator.

### `lc3::core::CallbackType`

An enum that defines available hook triggers, described as follows and
enumerated in the order in which they are resolved if multiple are
pending.

- `PRE_INST`: Before the next instruction executes.
- `INT_ENTER`: Upon entering an interrupt service routine.
- `EX_ENTER`: Upon entering an exception handler.
- `EX_EXIT`: Upon exiting an exception handler using `RTI`.
- `INT_EXIT`: Upon exiting an interrupt service routine using `RTI`.
- `SUB_ENTER`: Upon entering a subroutine using `JSR`.
- `SUB_EXIT`: Upon exiting a subroutine using `RET`.
- `INPUT_REQUEST`: When the simulator polls for input and no characters are
  pending in the buffer.
- `INPUT_POLL`: Any time the simulator polls for input.
- `POST_INST`: After the instruction finishes executing.

### `void registerCallback(CallbackType type, callback_func_t func)`

Register a function that is called when the hook given by `type` is triggered.

Arguments:

- `type`: Hook trigger given by the `lc3::core::CallbackType` enum.
- `func`: Function to call when the hook is triggered.

## Miscellaneous

### `bool didExceedInstLimit(void) const`

Check if instruction limit was exceeded. This is useful for verifying that a
program halted properly.

Return Value:

- `true` if the instruction limit was exceeded, `false` otherwise.

# `Tester`

Additionally, the testing framework, which is accessed by through
the `Tester` object, provides important functions for each
unit test and test case.

## Test Cases

### `test_func_t`

The function prototype that all test cases must follow, defined as
`std::function<void(lc3::sim & sim, Tester & tester)>`

Arguments:

- `sim`: Interface to simulator.
- `tester`: Interface to testing framework.

### `void registerTest(std::string const & name, test_func_t test_func, int randomizeSeed)`

Register a test case with the testing framework.

Arguments:

- `name`: Name of test case.
- `test_func`: Function to call when invoking test case.
- `randomizeSeed`: seed to use for randomizing the machine before program
  execution. Set to `0` for this seed to also be random. Set to `-1` to disable
  randomization. Note that the `seed` CLI flag from the test executable will
  override this argument.

### `void verify(std::string const & label, bool pred)`

Each registered test case can have varying amounts of test parts, which
individually checks for a component of the student's work being correct. While
test cases possibly describes the input that will be tested against, test parts
actually ensures that the student's code works as expected. Test parts can be
registered via the `verify()` method and its overloads.

If the condition specified by `pred` is `true`, mark the labeled test part
as passing. Otherwise, mark as failing.

Arguments:

- `label`: Identifier for current test part within a registered test function
- `pred`: Condition that must be true to pass the test part.

### `void verify(std::string const & label, T out, T expected)`

Overloaded definition which allows two variables of the same type to be passed
in and checked for equality. Test part passes if and only if `out == expected`.

Arguments:

- `label`: Identifier for current test part within a registered test function
- `out`: Value to be checked against the expected ground truth
- `expected`: Value that is expected from the student's output

### `void verify(std::string const & label, T out, T expected, bool (*comp)(T, T), std::string (*print)(T))`

Overloaded definition which not only allows two of the same type to be checked
for equality, but also accepts a comparator and printer function. Useful for
comparing more complex elements at once, such as two structs or `std::vector`.
Note that the arguments of the comparator and printer functions must match
the `out` and `expected` parameters of this `verify()` function definition.

Arguments:

- `label`: Identifier for current test part within a registered test function
- `out`: Value to be checked against the expected ground truth
- `expected`: Value that is expected from the student's output
- `comp`: Comparator function, returning true iff two elements are equal
- `print`: Printer function for the variable type

### `void output(std::string const & message)`

Outputs a message in the report before displaying test parts in a registered
test. Useful to give students insight into the actions the tester is taking to
check their assembly implementations.

Arguments:

- `message`: Message to output.

### `void debugOutput(std::string const & message)`

Outputs a debugging message directly to stdout (before the report) if the
`tester-verbose` command line flag is provided. Useful when debugging test
cases.

Arguments:

- `message`: Message to output.

### `void error(std::string const & label, std::string const & message)`

Reports that an error occurred in the test case. Errors may include exceeding
instruction execution limit or running into an LC-3 exception. If
`--json-output` is true, the error message will be registered as one single
test case which is failing (in `partialFailures`), effectively marking the
entire test case as incorrect.

_NOTE: return out of the test function after calling `error()` to prevent
additional `verify()` calls on faulty assembly code._

Arguments:

- `label`: String in the score report to identify this error.
- `msg`: The error message.

### `lc3::core::SymbolTable const & getSymbolTable(void) const`

Access the symbol table as an `std::unordered_map<std::string, uint16_t>`, which
contains the address of each symbol used across all assembly files under test.
If symbols are duplicated across assembly files, only one arbitrary instance
will be accessible in the symbol table.

Return Value:

- The symbol table.

## Memory Interface with Labels

### `uint16_t get_symbol_location(const std::string &symbol)`

Retrieves the memory address of a label. If `symbol` is not found
within the tested assembly implementation, an error will be reported.

Arguments:

- `symbol`: Label (or symbol within symbol table) in the assembly
  implementation to store value at

Returns:

- 16-bit value of the memory location of `symbol`

### `void write_mem_at_symbol(const std::string &symbol, std::uint16_t val)`

Writes a 16-bit value `val` into the label `symbol`. If `symbol` is not found
within the tested assembly implementation, an error will be reported.

Arguments:

- `symbol`: Label (or symbol within symbol table) in the assembly
  implementation to store value at
- `val`: 16-bit value to store into memory

### `std::uint16_t read_mem_at_symbol(const std::string &symbol)`

Reads a 16-bit value from label `symbol`. If `symbol` is not found
within the tested assembly implementation, an error will be reported.

Arguments:

- `symbol`: Label (or symbol within symbol table) in the assembly
  implementation to store value at

Return Value:

- 16-bit value at the argument label `symbol`

### `void write_string_at_symbol(const std::string &symbol, const std::string &str)`

Writes a string `str` into the label `symbol`. If `symbol` is not found within
the tested assembly implementation, an error will be reported.

Arguments:

- `symbol`: Label (or symbol within symbol table) in the assembly
  implementation to store value at
- `str`: String to write at label location

## String Reading in Memory

### `std::string read_mem_string(std::uint16_t addr)`

At address `addr`, begins reading an ASCII string until a null terminator, or
when a default maximum character limit of 100 is reached.

Arguments:

- `addr`: Address to begin reading an ASCII string in memory

Return Value:

- String read from memory

### `std::string read_mem_string(std::uint16_t addr, std::size_t len)`

At address `addr`, begins reading an ASCII string until a null terminator, or
when a maximum character limit of `len` is reached.

Arguments:

- `addr`: Address to begin reading an ASCII string in memory
- `len`: Maximum character limit to read the string

Return Value:

- String read from memory

## Automated Input

### `void setInputString(std::string const & source)`

Sets the string that the LC-3 system will use, character by character, when
the KBDR is read. In general, while there are characters remaining in the
string, the ready bit in the KBSR will be set. The exception is when
the chararacter delay (see `setInputCharDelay`) is nonzero.

Arguments:

- `source`: String to be used as input by LC-3.

### `void setInputCharDelay(uint32_t char_delay)`

Delays the LC-3 system from reading characters. When the delay is set to `N`,
the ready bit in the KBSR is set every `N` instructions while the input string
has not been fully consumed. To emulate polling based I/O, it is generally best
to set the delay to 0 so that input is consumed as quickly as possible. To
emulate interrupt based I/O, it can be advantageous to set the delay to a
nonzero value so that the interrupt service routine has time to complete before
being triggered again. The delay applies to every character in the input string
and does not change even if the input string does.

Arguments:

- `char_delay`: Delay before the ready bit in in the KBSR is set for each
  character, given in # of instructions executed.

## String Manipulation and Comparison

### `std::string getOutput(void)`

Returns all of the simulated output as a string.

Return Value:

- All of the simulated output as a string.

### `void clearOutput(void)`

Clears the output buffer, which stores the simulated output.

### `bool checkMatch(std::string const & a, std::string const & b)`

Return whether or not two strings equal each other exactly. Generally used to
compare the simulated output (returned from `getOutput`) with the expected
output.

Arguments:

- `a`: One string to compare with.
- `b`: Other string to compare with.

Return Value:

- `true` if the strings match exactly, and `false` otherwise.

### `bool checkContain(std::string const & str, std::string const & expected_part)`

Return whether or not `expected_part` is a substring of `str`. Generally used
to see whether the expected output is within the simulated output (returned from
`getOutput`). Useful when writing unit tests that don't need to compare every
character exactly.

Arguments:

- `str`: Larger string.
- `expected_part`: Substring to check.

Return Value

- `true` if `expected_part` is a substring of `str`, and `false` otherwise.

### `double checkSimilarity(std::string const & a, std::string const & b)`

Return the similarity (computed using Levenshtein Distance) between `source` and
`target` as a percentage within the range of [0-1]. Generally used to see how
similar the expected output is to the simulated output (returned from
`getOutput`). Useful when writing unit tests in which the simulated output only
needs to loosely match the expected output. Note that the implementation is not
very efficient so it should not be used on very long strings.

Arguments:

- `a`: One string to compare similarity with.
- `b`: Other string to compare similarity with.

Return Value:

- Percetage similarity in the range [0-1].

### `enum PreprocessType`

Enumerates preprocessing modes that are supported. Generally used to preprocess
the expected output and/or simulated output (returned from `getOutput`) for
comparison. Useful when writing unit tests in which the simulated output only
needs to match the expected output in content but not necessarily presentation.
Enum values are integers and can be combined together with a bitwise OR (|).

Values:

- `IgnoreCase`: Convert string to lower case.
- `IgnoreWhitespace`: Remove whitespace from string.
- `IgnorePunctuation`: Remove punctuation from string.

### `std::string getPreprocessedString(std::string const & str, uint64_t type)`

Preprocess a string. Generally used to preprocess the expected output and/or
simulated output (returned from `getOutput`) for comparison. Useful when writing
unit tests in which the simulated output only needs to match the expected output
in content but not necessarily presentation. Preprocessing method is supplied in
the `type` argument, generally by converting a `PreprocessType` value to
`uint64_t`. Multiple preprocessing methods can be combined together with a
bitwise OR (|).

Arguments:

- `str`: String to be preprocessed.
- `type`: Preprocessing method to apply.

Return Value:

- Preprocessed string.

# Copyright Notice

Copyright 2020 &copy; McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. No
reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill
Education.
